---
title: "Code Book"
author: "Ryan Summe"
date: "Friday, March 20, 2015"
output: html_document
---

This is an R Markdown document. Markdown is a simple formatting syntax for authoring HTML, PDF, and MS Word documents. For more details on using R Markdown see <http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com>.

UCI HAR Dataset source: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip 

Data Set Information:
=====================
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING UPSTAIRS, WALKING DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.

A full list of variables and explanations can be found in the UCI HAR Dataset/features_info.txt file.

run_analysis.R:
===============
This script compiles all the data in the study (excluding Inertial Signals) and returns a tidy table with means of all mean and standard deviation variables. It uses base R as well as functions from package:reshape2. Please have this package downloaded prior to running the script.

It contains two helper functions: checkFiles() and loadFiles(). checkFiles() is executed initially to make sure your working directory is correct and that the necessary files are available. loadFiles() is used to load the test and train sets of data. Some work is done here to a) add variable names (these names are stripped of non-alphanumeric characters to be valid R names), b) add subjects and activities to observations, and c) replace activity codes with decriptive factors.

reshaper2 is loaded automatically for you if you do not have it loaded. If it is not downloaded, there may be errors generated.

fullData is created by rbind()'ing the train and test data sets. msData is generated by only selecting columns with mean or standard deviation data. For this project, I chose to include variables that include "mean" and "std", regardless of case. msData is then melted (using package:reshape2) and dcasted (also reshape2) to return the means of each variable per subject, per activity.

Variables of results.txt:
Subject: identifier of volunteer (1-30)
Activity: Description of activity performed.

The remaining variables are "features" of the study. Please see below for further detail and units of measurement (copied from "features_info.txt" file).

Feature Selection 
=================

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag Pleas

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value
std(): Standard deviation

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean

The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'

